---
title: Delusions
excerpt: "About humanity's vainglory and the importance it attaches to mundane things."
permalink: /hsw/delusions/
flag: hsw
layout: hsw
date: 2018-08-21T00:04:00+00:00
---
Just to err on the side of caution, let me preface this with a
"Not Safe For Work" notice. Do not start reading out loud. Doubly
so if your colleagues are people of esteem, with high moral
values.

You were hesitant at first, thinking about the longer term
implications.  But now that you had sex are expecting a wedding
ring.  Okay, it may be a bit too early for marriage, but you are
already looking for some definitive proof of commitment to the
relationship.  You muse about true love, "now and ever after",
summer wine, the aroma of roses, the sunset's reflections in the
water, and all the other tropes of tradition and romantic poetry.

I have some bad news for you.  Love is not transcendent.  It
lasts for as long as it does.  It might be for a night, a month,
a few years, or a lifetime.  That is dependent on circumstances,
ultimately tracing their cause to biology.  You see, physical
attraction is the epiphenomenon.  What is actually set in motion
is a series of events that change the degrees of certain
substances in the body in relation to learned patterns of social
interaction.  I defer to chemists and psychologists for the
details.  What basically appears to be the case is that we
experience a change in our body's equilibrium, which throws us
off balance, as it were, and we start perceiving things in a
distorted way; seeing the other with rose-tainted glasses.

You know that feeling when you first think of someone as
beautiful, kind-hearted, sweet, and the like.  There are no
flaws.  Love at first sight is the equivalent of poor eyesight.  It is
akin to feeling angry: you do not think clearly, your perception
is twisted.  The beautified view changes after a while, once the
inner equilibrium is restored.  Prima facie you were attractive.
Now that normality has returned other fields of endeavour demand
attention.

Love is typically thought of as a permanent feeling.  Whereas
*love at first sight* is considered a passion.  To its credit,
this distinction recognises the physical impulse that is a
passion.  Perhaps, then, permanent love is a learned passion.  An
adaptation to what once was the abnormal and has now become the
new normal.

At any rate, these things happen outside our control.  Do not
fool yourself.  Your mood is contingent on your chemistry.  You
cannot just fall in love if there is no underlying reaction that
triggers the concatenation of events we understand as, or
associate with, affection.

It is pointless to speak of the natural condition in terms of
good or bad.  It is.  The normative value we attach to it does
not affect it.  A society may unanimously decide to banish
breathing, out of concern for the carbon it emits or the oxygen
it consumes.  Good for them to care about such things.  The only
problem is that nature is mind-independent.  We can only
influence those items that are contingent on human thought and
action; on human institution.  The rest is outside the reach of
our conventions.

Back to love and its meta-narratives.  We have forced ourselves
into this social mould where we pretend to love *once*.  Similar
to the futile task of prohibiting the respiratory system, our
pretenses about love's pureness will eventually be confronted
with reality.  At which point we call the lawyer to prepare the
paperwork for the divorce.

If a great number of marriages break up, and if those who remain
in tact are for reasons other than pure love, then we might as
well not exert this immense pressure on ourselves.  Yes, I am
talking about taking love at face value.  Living the moment.

Of course, there are good reasons not to be frivolous and to have
checks in place; reasons that relate to social organisation,
public health and welfare, or else politics.  For instance, it
would be irresponsible to impregnate women and let them face
motherhood on their own.  They would suffer.  The children would
have a hard time.  Society would struggle to cope with the likely
surplus of orphans, and so on.

But that is not the point here.  I am referring to the pretenses
we maintain about an element of human relationships that is
presumed as eternal.  If it really is, then it does not need to
be instituted as such.  So it is not.  And we tacitly acknowledge
that.  For while we preach the ostensible transcendence of true
love we also meticulously take all necessary measures to treat it
just like any other possession: subject to constraints that
create scarcity, or else exclusivity.

Striped of its theological underpinnings, marriage is an
institution that entails rights and obligations.  It is a
cultural-legal instrument that works just like property rights.
At best, a mutual claim of ownership.  At worst, guarantees for
sex on demand by the dominant party to the relationship.

Then there is the dishonesty towards ourselves, which we consider
part of our moral code.  When you are not in a relationship it is
permissible to follow your biology.  You feel attraction and act
accordingly, perhaps within the confines of what is socially
permissible, though such constraints can be defied with ease.
But here is the catch: nature does not care about social norms.
You will continue to feel attraction even after you engage in a
relationship.  Maybe to a lesser degree because you feel more
attracted to your original/current love.  Yet the point stands.
Your body did not change all of a sudden, just because you
adopted this misbegotten notion that love falls within the domain
of private property.

You know what else is outside our control, just because nature
does not care about our vanity?  Findings ways to satisfy the
instincts, such as by conforming to the role of the romantic
lover until you get laid.  For that is what happens *all the
time*.  Do you really believe that you dinned together out of a
common gastronomical interest that is an end in itself?  Or that
you spent half an hour looking at the swans in the pond due to an
inclination for ornithology or something?  How about those sudden
shifts in music preferences and the newfound interests in
literature and cinematography?  Yes, you guessed it.

Now let me generalise a bit, as this article is actually not
about your sexual adventures.  I do not care about you, nor will
I come to your party.  Where I am going with this is at the
tendency human has to consistently entertain false beliefs,
despite piles of evidence to the contrary.  Furthermore, it is
baffling how we find it desirable to maintain moral rules that
directly contradict our nature.

Love is not the only area where we prefer to remain delusional.
Think about the "true patriot" who dies on the battlefield to
protect the establishment, expecting the afterlife as a reward as
well as post-death recognition of their heroism.  How convenient
it must be for the extractive classes to perpetuate this idea
that it is desirable to disregard present injustices for a vastly
superior life after lifeâ€”and heroes reserve a special spot there.
What?  You say it is an unverifiable promise?  An expedient lie
just to get things done and move on?  Of course it is.  Like
claiming that you will 100% love someone for eternity and you
will have eyes for no other.  Which is true until the day it is
not.

I would speculate that the fundamental reason for maintaining
this stance is our commitment to a rather strong version of free
will.  You act out of your own volition and must assume
responsibility for the consequences of your actions.  The
stronger the type of free will a society believes in, the greater
the responsibility each choice carries.  Absolute freedom entails
absolute responsibility; the reverse of which is absolute
punishment.  The reason I make this connection is because we
insist on preserving the perverse elements of our moral code.
The belief is that we can defy nature exactly because of our free
will and, therefore, there can be no constraints on what our
morality may demand.

Free will is perceived as this bastion of true self that kind of
toils against the forces of the natural order, the temptations,
the instincts, to maintain its truthfulness.  Which is to say
that free will is considered transcendent and that you are your
true self regardless of the world around you.  Variants of this
worldview are the theories about the body-soul divide, the
eternity of the soul, reincarnation, the afterlife, and so on.

Yet there is no indication whatsoever that there is a kernel of
true self that is immune to the forces of probabilistic cause and
effect. This is just whimsy perpetuated through the
centuries.

Let's get naive determinism out of the way: the inattentive
observer thinks that lighting a match and throwing it in a hay
stack is the cause of the resulting fire. In fact, there is a
whole host of factors at play, such as the level of humidity in
the local atmosphere, the speed of the wind, the condition of the
hay and of the match so that both are good fire conductors (e.g.
they are not wet), and so on.

Complex systems cannot be understood in simplistic linear terms
of A causes B. Same with humans. We are a function of internal
processes and external stimuli. The internal/external divide is
conceptual, for the system of interlinked factors we conceive as
human organism is but a set of emergent subsystems within the
broader ecosystem, and so on. We may not be able to draw a
straight line from the original cause to the epiphenomenon, say,
the feeling of love. But we can study these interconnected
variables to discern patterns and draw further conclusions. They
are there, not in some spurious 'domain' of the transcendent.

What we perceive as free will, the ability to choose and plan
ahead, might just as well be a dynamic function of feedback loops
with possible outcomes traced to said subsystems, which is not
unique to humans as it is found in animals and even plants.  At
any rate, that is a matter of objective research, not mystical
mumbo jumbo.

I call this bundle of beliefs on the ostensible transcendence of
self, the "decontextualised human".  Conceived as a being as
such, perhaps trapped within an ephemeral vessel, but an absolute
self nonetheless that is not decisively influenced, indeed
moulded and determined, by their environment.  In this case, the
environment also includes human relations, for they too present
external stimuli.  The decontextualised human is one of our
society's most deep seated convictions, underpinning everything
from social policy, to the content of laws, the way courts
deliver justice, and prisons are organised.

Reconsidering our values would do us good.  Reduce the disconnect
between who we are and who we think we are.  No more stressing
about our inability to control forces that exist outside the
purview of our "free will" or social order in general.  No need
to maintain this facade of righteousness, the underlying
hypocrisy of much of our moral code and values.

Oh, you think you committed the same sin *again*.  You must be
admonished for your immorality!  But what if the very notion of
considering a natural condition sinful is the problem in the
first place?

Nature is. There is no good-bad divide therein. A realignment of
priorities and beliefs is in order.
