---
title: Contempt
excerpt: "About humanity's capacity to treat their entire experience as worthy only of contempt."
permalink: /hsw/contempt/
flag: hsw
layout: hsw
date: 2018-08-21T00:02:00+00:00
---
I have yet to see an animal other than human that can treat its
immediate experience, its entire life, as inherently false,
decadent, and only worthy of contempt.  Perhaps that is why we
think we are special.  We can contemplate our role in the world.
Who we are, what we do, why, how, and what should be changed, if
anything.  Human justifies this capacity as hinting at a higher
end, or some greater scheme about us compared to the rest of the
world.  There is a role we have to fulfil, a destiny that is
ultimately linked to our very being as humans.  And so, one
thinks that there is a sense of higher purpose to their presence
which is not limited to their life.  And somewhere along those
lines, the theologian—or however we call people who talk about
god[s] and neighbouring concepts without ever furnishing any kind
of objectively verifiable proof—will insert their system of
unfounded claims about what the intentions of god[s] are.

We are special.  Such is the basis of our reasoning.  Only humans
can do philosophy, for instance.  Only we possess the mental
capacity to grasp the higher order realities that are not
susceptible to the faculties of sense.  We are unique among the
animals, for we can escape the narrow confines imposed by
biological necessity.  Or so the thinking goes.  We can fathom a
state of affairs where we are detached from the world.  Aloof
from the fray of material needs and bodily experiences, we can
tap into an ultimate reality.  Strip away all the
phenomenalities.  We consider these deceitful, *lies* that
beguile our senses.  The true reality, or the ultimate
destination we should strive for, has no place for them.  That is
the end goal: to connect to the essence of the world.  The choice
we believe we have is, therefore, quite simple in its basic
formulation: live as a beast by succumbing to your natural
inclinations, or actively suppress them in order to ascend to an
intellectual being.  The spiritual self is the true self, the
immutable and eternal.  Harness it to fulfil your role in this
world.

Such is the value we can attach to ourselves.  We say we are
rational animals, conveniently downplaying the whole host of
behaviours that do not conform with that rigid ideal.  We think
we are calculative and operate on the "margin of rationality", as
the economist would put it, always optimising our choices.  There
is imperfection and irrationality, biases, uncontrollable
emotions, decisions that are adopted without complete knowledge
of things—for is there a single domain where we claim *complete
knowledge of*?  These do not change the narrative of our
exceptional status.  We can overcome them, so long as we keep
sight of this narrow subset of human experience that we consider
so important.

But there is disagreement amount the proponents of human
exceptionalism as to what the differentiating factor is.  Those
who do not place disproportionate value on human reason find
something else to venerate.  It goes by various names, such as
the "soul", the "spirit".  These can be cultivated in a variety
of ways other than what we associate with rationality, in order
to attain the same objective of ascendance.

That is a distinction between rationalists and spiritualists,
whose midpoint is the thesis of human beings as the chosen ones.
*Human as an entity sui generis.*

The **first issue** I see with such exceptionalism is ontological
dualism.  The mind, the soul, the spirit, or whatever it is that
is responsible for reasonableness and/or spirituality is treated
as a distinct entity from the rest of the body.  The latter is
the domain of the bestial.  Our ephemeral self.  The instincts,
the emotions, the irrationality.  Whereas our true self is
detachable from the body.  It can be freed from it.

The specifics of the narrative vary, depending on the tradition
concerned.  Is it not bizarre though, that whatever the details
we have no indication whatsoever of some other 'essence' that is
somehow intertwined with our base being?  Our capacity to think
clearly is a function of our body's inner processes and of its
health.  If you do not nourish yourself properly over an extended
period of time, you will not be able to think correctly.  If you
feel pain, that is all you care about.  Are you delirious in
fear?  Forget about plotting the most precise course of action.
If you get knocked on the head you might stop thinking the same
way you could before.  An injury is the definition of being
affected by this world.  You can claim that rocks are somehow
fake and not worthy of 'real' experience.  Fair enough, note
though that a phenomenality that smacks you on the forehead can
still send you to the hospital.

In the same vein, we have no indication of the soul as a distinct
domain of agency, let alone a separate 'essence'.  Whatever the
particularities of the narrative, it builds on the presumption of
a transcendent soul, simply working backwards from a conclusion.
Which is to say that it is dogmatic.  So, you claim that the soul
transcends the rules of this world and that it is eternal?  And
yet, here it is, 'trapped' as it were inside a human body, which
is to say that it is, after all, bound by a subset of the rules
of this world.  For the body is a natural system, a subsystem
within the broader ecosystem.

You want to emancipate your soul by performing all those rituals
or live life in a certain way.  There may be benefits to that
mode of living, such as mental health. Do it!  But the very claim
that the transcendent is at once above this world and yet
decisively confined to the secular or the cosmic is absurd.  If
it is transcendent, how do you measure it?  How can you possibly
claim it is 'there'.  For if it is *somewhere*, then by
definition it occurs within space.  If, on the other hand, it is
just a thought of ours, then how can we even insist on the notion
that it is bound to the body?

The more you delve into the inner contradictions the more likely
it is to encounter mysticism.

As a first line of defence comes the tactic of belittling us
compared to some exalted being, which itself is unverifiable.  We
are too foolish to understand the grand design.  Throw in some
allusion to our ape minds for good measure.  It is hubris to use
our logic and our faculties of sense as means of debunking those
views of the world.  Just believe and you will see the way.  At
which point you single out the double standard whereby their
claims are not to be questioned but the sceptic's argument must
always be refuted by the very inability of human beings to grasp
the 'truth'.  Then, when the mystics are pressed on their
epistemological inconsistencies they resort to propositions of
the sort *"god works in mysterious ways"*.  Looks aporetic on the
surface, but actually clings on to a well defined set of beliefs.
Perhaps the very antithesis of inquisitiveness.

As **a second issue** with the schools of thought that propound
notions of human exceptionalism, I would suggest that perhaps our
claims about the soul, the true self, immortality, all trace
their roots to biology.  They are perhaps rendering lucid a base
instinct.  Now this is rampant speculation from my side and no
more that a hypothesis that would need to be tested, but here it
is: what if our survival instinct is in fact taking over our
thinking processes, trying to make sure that we survive no matter
what?  And what if, by extension, the idea that we can live
forever in some shape or form is but the impression of
rationality/spirituality derived from instinct?  Again, this is
speculation that would need to be backed up or dismissed by a
fully fledged research programme.  So I continue: if we are hard
wired to survive, and if this drive is perceived in a different
form as pure reasonableness or spiritual enlightenment, then
perhaps the very notion of rationality/spirituality and of the
true self is but a heap of misunderstandings or illusions.

Everything in this world is subject to probabilistic cause and
effect.  Our bodies—mind included—are dynamically influenced and
determined by their internal processes as well as stimuli
external to them.  This complex interplay produces thoughts and
triggers for action, which among others lead to new learned
experiences and patterns of adaptation, and so on.  Maybe—just
maybe—we are led by our instincts to think of ourselves as
operating free from biological impulses, in the same way the dog
impulsively gives chase to the ball thinking it is desirable to
run after the 'prey' even after it knows that the ball is, in
fact, a toy.  Perhaps then, the notion of finding our true self
is an exercise in futility.

We can only be our nature—there is no choice involved.  Choice
concerns what we could consider as second order items.  The
'essence', what we are made of, remains outside our reach. We
cannot choose to be non-human or to pick and choose the part of
humanity we want, such as beings humans but forgoing the need to
eat and sleep.

My point is that we need to gather findings, results that are
reproducible in a manner that is objective.  Else we add to the
echo chamber, perpetuate a tradition just because we find solace
in its teachings.

Speaking of solace, is not fear a byproduct, or somehow linked to
the survival instinct?  Why are we afraid of things, if not
because they might threaten our existence either fatally or
partially by exposing us to a potential injury?  Fear is a
manifestation of the struggle for survival.  Again, this should
be put to the test, such as to see if plants feel fear and adapt
their behaviour accordingly.

If all my speculation would translate into a fully fledged
research project, I would suggest that we delve into this notion
of consoling our soul, of ataraxia, or whatnot.  Is it
emancipation from whatever temptation or power holds us hostage
to our base instincts?  Or are we just desperately seeking
answers as a means of alleviating our existential fear?  Anything
will do, regardless of its correspondence to the actuality of
things.  Just give a plausible answer, which all too often
delivers us the nostrums of mysticism.

The **third issue** with human exceptionalism is its propensity
for nihilism.  Everything in this world is framed as an illusion
of sorts.  And people are, by default, *mere animals* that have
yet to ascend.  They might have the potential to see the light,
though they are nowhere near it in their natural state.  It
follows that all that happens in this world, our politics, the
economy, culture and sport, are lesser activities.  They do not,
in and of themselves, take us to this supposed next level.  They
are distractions or, at best, activities with secondary values.
No wonder many of those harbouring contempt for the world argue
for withdrawing from society in pursuit of enlightenment.

Nihilism is the dark side, if you will, of idealism.  Or rather
of the conflation between the ideal and the actual.  Idealists of
this sort have a very stylised view of how the world ought to be.
It is not corresponding to things as they are.  It is a product
of their prior exceptionalism.  The domain of the god[s], the
eternal soul, human's capacity to ascend, the falsehoods of
phenomenality.  If you only want ideal beauty, then everyone out
there is ugly.  The ideal is an abstraction, derived by tracing
the common in the multitude of phenomena.  Abstractions are
products of thought.  And products of thought can be shared
between humans because we have the same biology.  Just as the
design of our hearts, or lungs, or limbs is the same, so are the
basic functions of the mind.  There are differences.  Differences
of degree, not category.

The misguided idealist of the sort here considered will insist on
attaining the abstract.  They believe their obstinacy will reify
their imaginary state of affairs.  Eventually, a tension arises
between expectation and results.  Rather than recognising the
original confusion between the ideal and the real as the source
of the problem, it is the world that has to bear the brunt of the
blame.  This world which is fake, hypocritical, decadent...  This
world that only keeps the soul/spirit/mind/whatever chained to an
inferior reality.  Thus comes nihilism.  There is nothing real or
worthy in anything human does: pleasures of the body are bad,
because the body is the soul's prison, the source of base
instincts, etc.  Interest in politics is inherently misguided
because *"all politicians are the same"* and the world is corrupt
and evil.  Besides, why bother changing your immediate life when
it is a "false life" after all?  And so the nihilist will expound
on their ideals and insist that what they care about is a true
reality.  In the meantime, they become the most reflexive type of
ultra-conservative, reverse apologists of the established order
and of anti-research.  "Reverse apologists" in the sense that
their intention is not that of justifying the status quo, but
that their behaviour contributes to that end regardless.

If life in this world is a lie, why bother with a fairer
distribution of resources, peace within the family, mutual
understanding between cultures, or whatnot.  Why care about the
ecosystem if, ultimately, it too is an idol; at best a fake
representation of reality?  There can be no qualitative
difference between annihilating all the species and fighting to
preserve the ecosystem's balance **if** there is nothing worthy
in this world.  And the same can be said about all normative
issues that humans have to deal with in their collective life.
In politics, that is.

The nihilists commit the error of using the ideal as the enemy,
rather than the guide, of the good, of the realisable.  Maybe
they are not as crude.  They might become selective nihilists,
misanthropes for instance where they blame humanity for
everything that is bad while exalting "mother nature" for all
that is good.  And where does humanity come from, if not nature?
The answer to this is predictably theological.  In the Western
tradition evil is attributed to "free will", which is another one
of those baseless assertions like dualism and the transcendent
soul, afterlife, etc.

Free will, in its purest form, is the claim that there is at
least a kernel of human self—this notorious "true self"—that is
not bound by anything and only operates in accordance with its
own devices.  What we do is out our own volition.  There are no
biological underpinnings, no environmental stimuli, no social,
cultural, historical artefacts that inform our judgement.  This
is the myth of the decontextualised human, a being in itself,
self contained, detached from the world, yet somehow strictly
confined to it.  Again, one can trace hints of dualism.

I am very much sceptical of this mumbo jumbo.  No doubt, it is a
powerful belief.  See, here I type *this*.  I just did it because
I decided to.  My will, my rules.  Ha!  But what if what we
conceive as freedom is but the expression—and inward
impression—of a dynamic probabilistic function of the interplay
between internal processes and external stimuli?  What if typing
*this* is something that the complex underlying processes of my
being seeks and gets feedback from to reinvigorate the cycle?
That would not be the kind of transcendent free will of Western
mythos, but another common phenomenon—or concatenation thereof—of
this world.

Probabilistic cause and effect.  There is nothing transcendental,
truer, or special about it.
