---
title: Greens
excerpt: "About the principles that distinguish environmentalism from ecology."
permalink: /hsw/greens/
flag: hsw
layout: hsw
date: 2018-08-21T00:07:00+00:00
---
In politics we often see the terms "environment" and "ecosystem"
used interchangeably.  Same with "environmentalism" and
"ecology", and their derivatives.  While the political process
does not always require precision of statement, it must be noted
that the underlying values of these terms differ profoundly.

Environmentalism is, in essence, a variant of anthropocentrism
(human-centrism).  Everything *environs* us.  Human is at the
epicentre, conceived as something different or somehow special
compared to the rest of nature.  This is an age-old tradition
that has been reformulated and embellished with new ideas
throughout history from ancient mythology to Humanism.

Even if only indirectly and despite whatever positives,
anthropocentrism has driven humanity's incessant drive to exploit
nature without restraint.  Animals are raised in the equivalent
of death camps, to be slaughtered en masse, because they are
"just animals".  Plants are being over-engineered to yield ever
greater quantities of crops, with numerous downsides to their own
well-being and the sustainability of the other species (economic
oligopolies and the feudalism of the patent holders
notwithstanding), the health of the soil, as well as that of
consumers.

In terms of first principles, the environmentalist does not want
to change the dynamic between humanity and the rest of nature.
Rather, the focus is on some narrowly defined targets, secondary
issues, such as carbon emissions and the accompanying financial
markets (carbon emission trading).  In the same spirit, there is
growing emphasis on economic incentives to adapt to new methods
of doing business, such as relying on renewable energy, without
changing the underlying assumptions and aspirations of industrial
production at large.  The entire system covering everything from
production-consumption-ownership is not considered at fault, nor
is it seen with suspicion.  Just keep track of the carbon dioxide
and similarly marketable snippets of 'green thinking'.

In contradistinction, the ecosystem includes humanity as yet
another factor of a broader whole.  Humans are no more special
than grass, rats, bees...  The uniqueness we want to attach to
ourselves, such as our relative intellectual superiority is, in
truth, a difference of degree, not category.

I guess a good analogy for understanding variations of this sort
is to think of life as akin to the output of the sound mixing
console.  All those sliders and rotary controls have to be fine
tuned to produce a specific sound.  A minor change modifies the
output.  The more one tinkers with the controls, the greater the
degree of the change.  In the same spirit, every instance of life
can be conceived as the end product of a specific set of
combinations between an array of interrelated factors.  Hence the
differences in degree.

In the ecosystem everything is connected, for that is what
"system" means: a set of interlinked variables whose joint
operation produces local as well as emergent phenomena, which is
governed by system-wide and topical rules, and which sustains its
operations endogenously.  Humanity cannot be without plants or
other animals, or the kind of weather equilibrium it has survived
in, the specific arrangements of the Earth's and Moon's orbits in
relation to themselves and towards the Sun, and so on.

Note here that "ecosystem" should be qualified as a set of
subsystems, each of which can be discernible in its own right.
So that we can speak of the Earth's ecosystem, or the ecosystem
of a swamp, without having to talk about the universe.  In the
same way we can think of the human organism—a human being—as
such, without having to explain each time that we are, in fact,
referring to a set of subsystems all the way from the atomic and
molecular levels to the organs and to their interlinked presence
thereof.  Perhaps then, it is appropriate we find the correct
terms for each order of abstraction, though that might mean that
we run out of words depending on the degree of precision.  Or
maybe we just use qualifiers, such as the "Earth's ecosystem",
"Europe's ecosystem", etc.  But I digress.

Humanity is nothing without the rest of the ecosystem.  The
dichotomy posited by environmentalists can only be entertained as
one of perspective, not ontology.  Which would, however, imply
that the meta-narratives of anthropocentrism are altogether
dismissed, or at least thoroughly reconsidered.

Let us entertain the latter possibility.  What would a revised
self image of humanity look like?  I think it should start by
explicitly making the environmentalist binary an arbitrary
subject/object divide based on our vantage point.  The ecosystem
environs us in a literal sense, without implications of any
[mystical] difference of category.  Then, and even if we only
care about ourselves, we must acknowledge the fact that our very
existence is contingent on there being a robust ecosystem
suitable to our presence and that of every life form that
flourishes together with, or alongside, us.  Which entails a
whole host of action programmes and necessary adaptations.

This, by the by, is not the same as deifying "mother nature",
prohibiting any kind of interference out of some prejudice that
me might be disturbing the balance, or even expecting the rest of
the species to conform to human conventions (such as animal
"rights", which in truth are human "obligations").

While seemingly secular, the vision of the ecosystem as a
superior being, as the mother of all existence, rests on all
sorts of baseless assumptions.  As concerns the evident
personification, we have no means of knowing whether the
ecosystem is *just* an aggregation of sub-systems with emergent
phenomena resulting from their interplay, or if it also is a
greater conscience or being whose inner mechanics we only
experience on the micro scale as seemingly inanimate systems
(same with how atoms do not exhibit consciousness—as far as we
know—but humans, who are made of atoms, do).

Such speculation does not really change the parameters of the
debate on which anthropocentrism rests.  It just shifts the
focus, or reformulates the narrative.  Instead of an extra-cosmic
god qua grand architect, as in biblical tradition, we have an
ever-present, yet still anthropomorphic or animal-like,
ubiquitous source of life.

These theories are not mutually exclusive and do not prejudice
the possibility that we develop an anthropocentric worldview that
is consistent with them, such as humanity being the chosen child
of mother nature, whereby the human soul has a transcendent
presence that is not found in the rest of the species in order to
fulfil some higher objective, etc.

The specifics will take us on a tangent.  Our imagination is the
only limit here and it can keep us writing for the rest of our
life.  The point is that anthropocentrism is, at its root, a
theological account.  Whether the theology is of one kind or
another does not change this basic fact.

The problem with all theology is what I alluded to in the chapter
about *Godlessness*, namely that its claims cannot be verified in
an objective manner.  Theology is like a game of luck where all
numbers win.  Everyone can have their own theory and they may all
claim to be correct, as none can ever be proven right or wrong.

Overcoming anthropocentrism is about grounding human's sense of self
in a narrower set of principles.  While the task may seem
daunting, it is surprisingly simple and boils down to this: stick
to the facts.  The humanity/environment distinction is one of
perspective.  Human presence is contingent on there being an
ecosystem.  Beyond those, the problem with anthropocentrism is
not about the way it is framed, but its political implications.

The human world is inherently complex.  International economics,
finance, and monetary affairs are too much for one person to
grasp in the fullness of their scale.  Let alone the interplay
between the multitude of decentralised actors, the implications
of diverging cultural-historical path dependencies of the various
peoples, the unique features of each society, both in terms of
social structures and political institutions, and so on.

Amid this bewildering complexity, one can be excused of
forgetting that principles are always simple.  It is their
implementation or particularisation that introduces complexity.

For instance, the entire world could function within a single,
overarching constraint, which we may call the *principle of
sustainability*.  Whether it is finance, or fiscal policy, or the
conduct of war, everything has to be gauged in terms of its
capacity to remain contained to its subject matter before it
creates deleterious, spill-over effects that would prevent a
return to the previous state of affairs.  If any one of human's
fields of endeavour becomes unsustainable, it produces a cascade
of catastrophic consequences which can, at the extreme, lead to
our annihilation or, at the very least, to its discontinuation.

Think of sustainable warfare, as tasteless as that term may be.
We cannot nuke each other into oblivion.  That guarantees the
destruction of the planet and our annihilation.  In this sense,
the end of war is only brought about by absolutely total war.

What about sustainable finance?  The only reason the global
economic system remains in place is because it has yet to reach
peak saturation.  It still finds outlets to release the pressure,
as it were, and thus survives its cyclical shocks/crises.  It
survives by identifying new areas to exploit and to rollover the
problem; a problem that is incrementally aggrandised, yet whose
burden continues to be shifted around so that it remains less
obvious.  Whatever calamities, poverty, austerity, precarity,
mass economic migration, are contained to various segments of
human society or geographic locales that seem to change
periodically.  The system as such is yet to reach a terminus, at
which point it will no longer be sustainable in the sense of
merely being capable of continuing (so not "sustainable" in the
normative sense of desirability for society—it is well beyond
that, though that is an issue of extractive classes exploiting
the masses of people the world over, which is a major political
challenge, though not necessarily one that concerns ecology as
such).

And so on for every other human activity.

To this end, the 'green' themes are in need of a rethink.  For it
is not the underlying theology that is at stake here.  Nor is the
problem about turning "black industry" (production powered by
fossil fuel) into "green industry" (production powered by
renewable energy), or conforming to a target for carbon
emissions.  While important in their own right, these are
secondary issues in the grand scheme of things.  This is about
refactoring the entire framework of values pertaining to
production-consumption-ownership.  And that involves everything
from the distribution of resources, the way costs and the
externalities of waste are handled, the degree to which private
property is considered untouchable, the narrowing of the scope of
intellectual property and patents, the decentralisation of
economic activity and the concomitant devolution of political
authority to the local level.

As such, ecology is only tangentially about reformulating the
narrative about human's self worth.  This is a matter of deciding
between a political order that, by and large, satisfies the
interests of the few more than those of the many, or a new order
that does not produce winners and losers in accordance with the
self perpetuating "winner takes it all" mentality.

What 'green' themes introduce is another aspect to this ever
pertinent debate.  That the power balance within human society
also depends on actions or phenomena that seem to have no direct
effect on humanity.

Couched in those terms, revaluing our self image, so that we are
no longer some unique 'essence' that is distinct from the rest of
the ecosystem, may just be the first step in the long road of
reviewing our politics and the deep seated assumptions that fuel
them.
