---
title: Changelog
excerpt: "This document records all changes made to the 'Little Guide to the European Union'."
permalink: /euguide/changelog/
flag: euguide
layout: euguide
date: 2016-04-17T00:15:00+00:00
---
Book version: `{{ site.data.text.euguide.version}}`

This document records all changes made to the *Little Guide to the European Union*.

The version number attains the following form: {major rewrite}.{minor update}.{inconsequential correction}.[^SemVerNote]

## Versions

### 1.1.2 • June 11, 2017

- Minor corrections.

### 1.1.1 • November 23, 2016

- Added Jakub Jermář to the "special thanks" section. This was a serious omission from my side, albeit an unintended one.
- Removed two non-substantive footnotes from the conclusion. They were no longer relevant.

### 1.1.0 • June 18, 2016

- Expanded the article about the brand of EU federalism with a final section on the distinction between federalism and republicanism. The argument being that the EU is a federal system, though not a federal republic.
- Introduced some explanatory sentences in an effort to clarify a few points.
- Fixed an issue with the meta description of the ECB chapter.

### 1.0.2 • June 17, 2016

- Corrected a crucial mistake in the chapter about the European Central Bank. A missing "not" at the final paragraph was completely altering the final point.
- Minor corrections.
- Modified the reference introduced in `1.0.1` from "Oliveira" to "Prot16". The former is part of the latter.

### 1.0.1 • May 18, 2016

- Updated the "special thanks" section to include a reference to [Oliveira](/oliveira/) my first syntax highlighting colour scheme.

### 1.0.0 • May 9, 2016

- Published the Little Guide to the European Union.

[^SemVerNote]: The version system follows the guidelines set out in the [Semantic Versioning specification](http://semver.org/), authored by Tom Preston-Werner.
